\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename recode.info
@settitle GNU @code{recode} reference manual
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@ifinfo
@set Francois Franc,ois
@end ifinfo
@tex
@set Francois Fran\noexpand\ptexc cois
@end tex

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* recode: (recode).     Conversion between character sets and usages.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo
This file documents the @code{recode} command, which has the purpose of
converting files between various character sets and usages.

Copyright (C) 1990, 1993, 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GNU recode, version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle The character set transliterator
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author @value{Francois} Pinard

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1993, 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top GNU @code{recode}

@c @item @b{@code{recode}} @value{hfillkludge} (UtilT, SrcCD)
@c
@code{recode} converts files between character sets and usages.  When exact
transliterations are not possible, it may get rid of the offending
characters or fall back on approximations.  This program recognizes or
produces nearly 150 different character sets and is able to transliterate
files between almost any pair.  Most RFC 1345 character sets are supported.

The current @code{recode} release is @value{VERSION}.

@menu
* Introduction::        What is the purpose of this program
* Invoking recode::     How to use this program
* Reversibility::       Reversibility issues
* RFC 1345 charsets::   Charsets from RFC 1345
* ISO charsets::        Charsets based on ASCII
* IBM charsets::        Charsets based on IBM
* CDC charsets::        Charsets based on CDC
* Micro charsets::      Non-IBM micro-computer charsets
* Other charsets::      Some other charsets
* Internals::           Internal aspects

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

What is the purpose of this program

* Overview::            Overview of charsets
* Contributing::        Contributions and bug reports

Charsets based on ASCII

* ASCII::               Usual ASCII
* ISO 8859-1 charset::  ASCII extended by Latin Alphabets
* ASCII-BS::            ASCII 7-bits, @key{BS} to overstrike
* flat::                ASCII without diacritics nor underline

Charsets based on IBM

* EBCDIC::              EBCDIC codes
* IBM-PC::              IBM's PC code
* Icon-QNX::            Unisys' ICON code

Charsets based on CDC

* Display Code::        Control Data's Display Code
* CDC-NOS::             ASCII 6/12 from NOS
* Bang-Bang::           ASCII ``bang bang''

Non-IBM micro-computer charsets

* Apple-Mac::           Apple's Macintosh code
* AtariST::             Atari ST code
* NeXT::                NeXT international code

Some other charsets

* LaTeX::               ASCII with LaTeX codes
* Texte::               ASCII with easy French conventions
* HTML::                World Wide Web representations

ASCII with easy French conventions

* Diacritics::          Diacritics
* Ending diaeresis::    List of words ending with diaeresis

Internal aspects

* Main flow::           Overall organization
* New charsets::        Adding new charsets
@end menu

@end ifinfo

@node Introduction, Invoking recode, Top, Top
@chapter What is the purpose of this program

This @code{recode} program has the purpose of converting files between
various character sets and usages.  When exact transliterations are not
possible, as it is often the case, the program may get rid of the offending
characters or fall back on approximations.

Let us coin the term @dfn{charset} to represent, without distinction, a
character set ``per se'' or a particular usage of a character set.  This
program recognizes or produces around 150 such charsets.  Since it can
convert each charset to almost any other one, many thousands of
different conversions are possible.

This tool pays special attention to superimposition of diacritics for
French representation.  This orientation is mostly historical, it does
not impair the usefulness, generality or extensibility of the program.

@menu
* Overview::            Overview of charsets
* Contributing::        Contributions and bug reports
@end menu

@node Overview, Contributing, Introduction, Introduction
@section Overview of charsets

Recoding is currently possible between most of the charsets described in
RFC 1345.  @xref{RFC 1345 charsets}.

Recode also handles some charsets in more specialized ways.  These are:

@itemize @bullet

@item
usual 7-bit ASCII: without any diacritics, or else: using backspace for
overstriking; Unisys' ICON convention; @TeX{}/La@TeX{} coding; easy
French conventions for electronic mail;

@item
8-bit extensions to ASCII: ISO Latin-1, Atari ST code, IBM's code for
the PC, Apple's code for the Macintosh, NeXT code;

@item
6-bit escaped ASCII based on CDC display code: 6/12 code from NOS;
bang-bang code from Universit@'e de Montr@'eal;

@item
non-ASCII codes: three flavors of EBCDIC.

@end itemize

The recent introduction of RFC 1345 in GNU @code{recode} has brought
with it a few charsets having the functionality of older ones, but yet
being different in subtle ways.  The effects have not been fully
investigated yet, so for now, clashes are avoided, the old and new
charsets are kept well separate.  For example, wizards would be
interested in comparing the output of these two commands:

@example
recode -vh IBM-PC:Apple-Mac
recode -vh IBM437:macintosh
@end example

@noindent
The first command uses only charsets prior to RFC 1345 introduction.
Both methods give different recodings, the first also properly recodes
end of lines.  These differences are annoying, the fuzziness will have to
be explained and settle down one day.

@node Contributing,  , Overview, Introduction
@section Contributions and bug reports

Even being the @code{recode} author and current maintainer, I am no
specialist in charset standards.  I only made @code{recode} along the
years to solve my own needs, but felt it was applicable for the needs of
others.  Some GNU people liked the program structure and suggested to
make it more widely available.  I rely on GNU users judgment for what
is best to be done next.

Properly protecting GNU @code{recode} about possible copyright fights is
a pain for me and for contributors, but we cannot avoid addressing the
issue in the long run.  Besides, the Free Software Foundation, which
mandates the GNU project, is very sensible to this matter.  GNU
standards require that I be cautious before looking at copyrighted code.
The safest and simplest way for me is to gather ideas and reprogram them
anew, even if this might slow me down considerably.  For contributions
going beyond a few lines of code here and there, the FSF definitely
requires employer disclaimers and copyright assignments in writing.

Many users contributed to GNU @code{recode} already, I am grateful to
them for their interest and involvement.  Some suggestions can be
integrated quickly while some others have to be delayed, I have to draw
a line somewhere when time comes to make a new release, about what would
go in it and what would go in the next.  Also, when you contribute
something to @code{recode}, @emph{please} explain what it is about.  Do
not take for granted that I know those charsets which are familiar to
you.  Your explanations could well find their way into this
documentation, too.

Mail suggestions, documentation errors and bug reports to
@code{bug-gnu-utils@@prep.ai.mit.edu} or, if you prefer, directly to
Francois Pinard @file{pinard@@iro.umontreal.ca}.  Do not be afraid to
report details, because this program is the mere aggregation of hundreds
of details.

@node Invoking recode, Reversibility, Introduction, Top
@chapter How to use this program

The general format of the program call is one of:

@example
recode [@var{option}]@dots{} [@var{charset}]
recode [@var{option}]@dots{} [@var{before}]:[@var{after}] [@var{file}]@dots{}
@end example

The second form is the common case.  Each @var{file} will be read
assuming it is coded with charset @var{before}, it will be recoded over
itself so to use the charset @var{after}.  If there is no such
@var{file}, the program rather acts as a filter and recode standard
input to standard output.

The available options are:

@table @code

@item -C
@itemx --copyright
Given this option, all other parameters and options are ignored.  The
program prints briefly the Copyright and copying conditions.  See the
file @file{COPYING} in the distribution for full statement of the
Copyright and copying conditions.

@item -a
@itemx --auto-check
In this special mode, @code{recode} diagnostics itself by analyzing
connectivity of the various charsets and reporting on standard output.
No file will be recoded.

There might be one non-option argument, in which case it is interpreted
as a charset name, possibly abbreviated to any non ambiguous prefix.
@code{recode} will then study all recodings having the given charset as
a starting or ending point.  If there is no such non-option argument,
@code{recode} will study @emph{all} possible recodings.

For each possible pair of different charsets, it prints on standard
output how many single steps are needed for achieving the recoding and
how many can be saved by step merging.  If a recoding cannot be done,
the word @samp{UNACHIEVABLE} is printed instead.  However, this special
line is completely suppressed if option @code{-x} specified some charset
to ignore.

The option @code{-h@var{name}} affects the resulting output, because
there are more merging rules when this option is in effect.  Other
options affect the result: @code{-d}, @code{-g} and, notably, @code{-s}.

There was a time, in GNU @code{recode} development, when this option was
reasonably interesting.  With the greater number of handled charsets,
it became inordinately slow, taking on the order of one hour of wall
clock time, while generating a great deal of output.  This option is not
practical anymore when used without a charset parameter.  However, it
can be made slightly more usable, together with option @code{-x.}, which
effectively disables most RFC 1345 charsets from the report.

@item -c
@itemx --colons
With @code{Texte} Easy French conventions, use the column @kbd{:}
instead of the double-quote @kbd{"} for marking diaeresis.
@xref{Texte}.

@item -d
@itemx --diacritics
While converting to or from one of @code{HTML} or @code{LaTeX} charset,
limit conversion to diacritics only.  This is particularly useful when
people write what would be valid @code{HTML}, @TeX{} or La@TeX{} files,
if only they were using provided sequences for applying diacritics
instead of using the diacriticized characters directly from the
underlying character set.

While converting to @code{HTML} or @code{LaTeX} charset, this option
assumes that non-diacriticized special characters are properly coded or
protected, so @code{recode} will transmit them literally.  While
converting the other way, this option prevents all attempts at
recognizing coded or protected versions of non-diacriticized special
characters of the other charset.  @xref{HTML}.  @xref{LaTeX}.

@item -f
@itemx --force
It is planned that some future version of @code{recode} will protect
you against recoding a file irreversibly over itself.  However,
please keep vividly in mind that this protection is not yet active
in @code{recode}.  When the protection will be enforced, option
@samp{-f} will become mandatory for a file to be replaced by some
recoding of its contents, if such conversion is loosing information.
For now, @code{recode} acts as if option @samp{-f} was always selected.

In preparation for the time this option will become mandatory, you
may start using @samp{-f} right away in scripts calling @code{recode},
when you know this is the reasonnable thing to do.

@c With this option, irreversible recodings are run to completion,
@c and @code{recode} does not exit with a non-zero status because of
@c reversibility matters.  @xref{Reversibility}.
@c 
@c Without this option, whenever an irreversible recoding is met,
@c @code{recode} produces a warning on standard error and aborts the
@c current recoding.  When there are many files to recode, it then proceeds
@c with the recoding of the next file.  When the program is merely used as
@c a filter, standard output will have received a partially recoded copy of
@c standard input, up to the first irreversible point.  After all
@c recodings have been done or attempted, and if some recoding has been
@c aborted, @code{recode} exits with a non-zero status.

@item -g
@itemx --graphics
This option is only meaningful while getting @emph{out} of the
@code{IBM-PC} charset.  In this charset, characters 176 to 223 are used
for constructing rulers and boxes, using simple or double horizontal or
vertical lines.  This option forces the automatic selection of ASCII
characters for approximating these rulers and boxes, at cost of making
the transformation irreversible.  Option @code{-g} implies @code{-f}.

@item -h[@var{name}]
@itemx --header[=@var{name}]
Instead of recoding files, @code{recode} writes a C source file on
standard output and exits.  This source is meant to be included in a
regular C program: its purpose is to declare and initialize an array,
named @var{name}, which represents the requested recoding.  If
@var{name} is not specified, then it defaults to
@code{@var{before}_to_@var{after}}, where @var{before} is the starting
charset and @var{after} is the goal charset.

Even if @code{recode} tries its best, this option does not always
succeed in producing the requested C table.  It will however, provided
the recoding can be internally represented by only one step after the
optimization phase, and if this merged step conveys a one-to-one or a
one-to-many explicit table.  But this is all fairly technical.  Better
try and see!

Beware that other options might affect the produced C tables, these are:
@code{-d}, @code{-g} and, particularly, @code{-s}.

@item -i
@itemx --sequence=files
When the recoding requires a combination of two or more elementary
recoding steps, this option forces many passes over the data, using
intermediate files between passes.  This is the default behavior when
files are recoded over themselves.  If this option is selected in filter
mode, that is, when the program reads standard input and writes standard
output, it might take longer for programs further down the pipe chain to
start receiving some recoded data.

@item -l[@var{format}]
@itemx --list[=@var{format}]
This option asks for information about all charsets, or about one
particular charset.  No file will be recoded.

If there is no non-option arguments, @code{recode} ignores the
@var{format} value of the option, it writes a sorted list of charset
names on standard output, one per line.  When a charset name have
aliases or synonyms, they follow the true charset name on its line,
presented in lexicographical order from left to right.  This list is
over one hundred lines.  It is best used with @code{grep}, as in:

@example
recode -l | grep greek
@end example

There might be one non-option argument, in which case it is interpreted
as a charset name, possibly abbreviated to any non ambiguous prefix.
This particular usage of the @code{-l} option is obeyed @emph{only} for
charsets having an RFC 1345 style internal description.  Even if most
charsets have this property, some do not, then option @code{-l} cannot
be used to detail these particular charsets.  For knowing if a
particular charset can be listed this way, you should merely try and see
if this works.  The @var{format} value of the option is a keyword from
the following list.  Keywords may be abbreviated by dropping suffix
letters, and even reduced to the first letter only:

@table @code

@item decimal
This format asks for the production on standard output of a concise
tabular display of the charset, in which character code values are
expressed in decimal.

@item octal
This format uses octal instead of decimal in the concise tabular display
of the charset.

@item hexadecimal
This format uses hexadecimal instead of decimal in the concise tabular
display of the charset.

@item full
This format requests an extensive display of the charset on standard
output, using one line per character showing its decimal, hexadecimal
and octal code values, and also a descriptive comment which is indeed
the 10646 character name.

@end table

When option @code{-l} is used together with a @var{charset} argument,
the @var{format} defaults to @code{decimal}.

@item -o
@itemx --sequence=popen
When the recoding requires a combination of two or more elementary
recoding steps, this option forces the creation of a chain of program
instances initiated through the @code{popen(3)} library call, all
operating in parallel.  In filter mode, costing the overhead of multiple
program initializations, recoded data will be available soon after the
program starts, even if many elementary recoding steps are required.

If, at installation time, the @code{popen(3)} call is said to be
unavailable, selecting option @code{-o} is equivalent to selecting
option @code{-i}.

@item -p
@itemx --sequence=pipe
When the recoding requires a combination of two or more elementary
recoding steps, this option forces the program to fork itself into a few
copies interconnected with pipes, using the @code{pipe(2)} system call.
All copies of the program operate in parallel.  This method is similar
to the method used through option @code{-o}, but is more efficient
because the program initializes only once.  This is the default
behavior in filter mode.  If this option is used when files are recoded
over themselves, this should also save disk space because some temporary
files might not be needed, at cost of more system overhead.

If, at installation time, the @code{pipe(2)} call is said to be
unavailable, selecting option @code{-p} is equivalent to selecting
option @code{-o}.  If both @code{pipe(2)} and @code{popen(3)} are
unavailable, selecting option @code{-p} is equivalent to selecting
option @code{-i}.

@item -q
@itemx --quiet
@itemx --silent
This option has the sole purpose of inhibiting diagnostic messages
about irreversible recodings.

@c It has no other effect, in particular, it
@c does @emph{not} prevent recodings to be aborted or @code{recode} to
@c return a non-zero exit status when irreversible recodings are met.

This option is set automatically for the children processes, when
recode splits itself in many collaborating copies.  Doing so, the
diagnostic is issued only once by the parent.  See options @code{-o}
and @code{-p}.

@item -s
@itemx --strict
By using this option, the user requests that @code{recode} be very
strict while recoding a file, merely loosing in the transformation any
character which is not explicitly mapped from a charset to another.
This option renders the recoding less likely reversible, so it also
implies option @code{-f}.  Also @xref{Reversibility}.

@item -t
@itemx --touch
The @emph{touch} option is meaningful only when files are recoded over
themselves.  Without it, the time-stamps associated with files are
preserved, to reflect the fact that changing the code of a file does not
really alter its informational contents.  When the user wants the
recoded files to be time-stamped at the recoding time, this option
inhibits the automatic protection of the time-stamps.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Before doing any recoding, the program will first print on @file{stderr}
the list of all intermediate charsets planned for recoding, starting
with the @var{before} charset and ending with the @var{after} charset.
It also prints an indication of the recoding quality, as one of the word
@samp{reversible}, @samp{one to one}, @samp{one to many}, @samp{many to
one} or @samp{many to many}.

This information will appear once or twice.  It is shown a second time
only when the optimization and step merging phase succeeds in creating a
new single step.

This option also has a second effect.  The program will print on
@file{stderr} one message per @var{file} recoded, so to let the user
informed of the progress of its command.

An easy way to know beforehand the sequence or quality of a recoding is
by using the command such as:

@example
recode -v @var{before}:@var{after} < /dev/null
@end example

@noindent
using the fact that, @emph{so far} in @code{recode}, an empty input file
produces an empty output file.

@item -x=@var{charset}
@itemx --ignore=@var{charset}
This option tells the program to ignore any recoding path through the
specified @var{charset}, so disabling any single step using this charset
as a start or end point.  This may be used when the user wants to force
@code{recode} in using an alternate recoding path.

@var{charset} may be abbreviated to any unambiguous prefix.  For
convenience, the value @samp{.} is an alias for @samp{RFC 1345}, so the
option @code{-x.} effectively disables @emph{all} RFC 1345 tables at
once.

@item --help
The program merely prints a page of help on standard output, and exits
without doing any recoding.

@item --version
The program merely prints its version numbers on standard output, and
exits without doing anything else.

@end table

The @var{before}:@var{after} argument specifies the start charset and
the goal charset.  The allowable values for @var{before} or @var{after}
are described in the remainder of this document.  Charsets may have
predefined alternate names, or aliases, which are equally acceptable.

In the @var{before}:@var{after} argument only, a backslash may be used
to quote the next character of a charset name.  This might be useful for
preventing a colon to be mistakenly interpreted as the separator between
@var{before} and @var{after}.  Rather, the colon could be omitted,
because while recognizing a charset name or alias, GNU @code{recode}
ignores all characters besides letters and digits.  There is also no
distinction between upper and lower case.  Charset names or aliases may
always be abbreviated to any unambiguous prefix.

One or both of the @var{before} or @var{after} keywords may be omitted,
but the colon which separates them cannot.  An omitted keyword implies
the usual or default code in usage on the system where this program is
installed.  Usually, this default code is @code{Latin-1} for UNIX systems
or @code{IBM-PC} for MS-DOS machines.

@node Reversibility, RFC 1345 charsets, Invoking recode, Top
@chapter Reversibility issues

Even if GNU @code{recode} tries hard at keeping the recodings
reversible, you should not develop an unconditional confidence in its
ability to do so.  You @emph{ought} to keep only reasonable expectations
about reverse recodings.  In particular, consider:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Most transformations are fully reversible for all inputs, but loose this
property whenever @code{-s} is specified.

@item
A few transformations are not meant to be reversible, by design.

@item
Reversibility sometimes depends on actual file contents and cannot
be ascertained beforehand, without reading the file.

@item
Reversibility is never absolute across successive versions of this
program.  Even correcting a small bug in a mapping could induce slight
discrepancies later.

@item
Reversibility is easily lost by merging.  This is best explained through
an example.  If you reversibly recode a file from charset @samp{A} to
charset @samp{B}, then you reversibly recode the result from charset
@samp{B} to charset @samp{C}, you cannot expect to recover the original
file by merely recoding from charset @samp{C} directly to charset
@samp{A}.  You will instead have to recode from charset @samp{C} back to
charset @samp{B}, and only then from charset @samp{B} to charset
@samp{A}.

@item
Faulty files create a particular problem.  Consider an example, recoding
from @code{IBM-PC} to @code{Latin-1}.  End of lines are represented as
@samp{\r\n} in @code{IBM-PC} and as @samp{\n} in @code{Latin-1}.  There
is no way by which a faulty @code{IBM-PC} file containing a @samp{\n}
not preceded by @samp{\r} be translated into a @code{Latin-1} file, and
then back.

@item
There is another difficulty arising from code equivalences.  For
example, in a @code{LaTeX} charset file, the string @samp{\^\i@{@}}
could be recoded back and forth through another charset and become
@samp{\^@{\i@}}.  Even if the resulting file is equivalent to the
original one, it is not identical.

@end itemize

Unless option @code{-s} is used, @code{recode} automatically tries to
fill mappings with invented correspondences, often making them fully
reversible.  This filling is not made at random.  The algorithm tries to
stick to the identity mapping and, when this is not possible, it prefers
generating many small permutation cycles, each involving only a few
codes.

For example, here is how IBM-PC code 186 gets translated to control-U
in Latin-1.  Control-U is 21.  Code 21 is the IBM-PC section sign,
which is 167 in Latin-1.  @code{recode} cannot reciprocate 167 to 21,
because 167 is the masculine ordinal indicator on IBM PC's, which is
186 in Latin-1.  Code 186 in IBM PC's has no Latin-1 equivalent; by
assigning back to 21, @code{recode} closes this short permutation loop.

As a consequence of this map filling, @code{recode} may sometimes
produce @emph{funny} characters.  They may look annoying, they are
nevertheless helpful when one changes his/her mind and wants to revert
to the prior recoding.  If you cannot stand these, use option @code{-s},
which asks for a very strict recoding.

This map filling sometimes has another surprising consequence.  In some
cases, @code{recode} seems to copy a file without recoding it.  But in
fact, it does.  As an illuminating example, consider you requested:

@example
recode l1:us < File-Latin1 > File-ASCII
cmp File-Latin1 File-ASCII
@end example

@noindent
then @code{cmp} will not report any difference.  This is quite normal.
Latin-1 gets correctly recoded to ASCII for charsets commonalities
(which are the first 128 characters, in this case).  The remaining last
128 Latin-1 characters have no ASCII correspondent.  Instead of loosing
them, recode elects to map them to unspecified characters of ASCII, so
making the recoding reversible.  The simplest way of achieving this is
merely to keep those last 128 characters unchanged.  The overall effect
is copying the file verbatim.

If you feel this behavior is too generous and if you do not wish to
care about reversibility, simply use option @code{-s}.  By doing so,
@code{recode} will strictly map only those Latin-1 characters which have
an ASCII equivalent, and will merely drop those which do not.  Then,
there is more chance that you will observe a difference between the
input and the output file.

@node RFC 1345 charsets, ISO charsets, Reversibility, Top
@chapter Charsets from RFC 1345

In the GNU @code{recode} distribution, there is a copy of RFC 1345:

@quotation
``Character Mnemonics & Character Sets'', K. Simonsen, Request for
Comments no. 1345, Network Working Group, June 1992.
@end quotation

This document is also available by anonymous ftp at @file{nic.ddn.mil}
in directory @file{rfc} as file @file{rfc1345.txt}.  This report defines
many character mnemonics and character sets.

GNU @code{recode} implements most of RFC 1345, however:

@enumerate
@item
It does not recognize 16-bits charsets: @code{GB_2312-80},
@code{JIS_C6226-1978}, @code{JIS_C6226-1983}, @code{JIS_X0212-1990} and
@code{KS_C_5601-1987}.

@item
It does not recognize those charsets which combine two characters for
representing a third: @code{ANSI_X3.110-1983}, @code{ISO_6937-2-add},
@code{T.101-G2}, @code{T.61-8bit}, @code{iso-ir-90} and
@code{videotex-suppl}.

@item
It interprets the charset @code{isoir91} as @code{NATS-DANO} (alias
@code{iso-ir-9-1}), @emph{not} as @code{JIS_C6229-1984-a} (alias
@code{iso-ir-91}).  So better avoid using these two alias names.

@item
It interprets the charset @code{isoir92} as @code{NATS-DANO-ADD} (alias
@code{iso-ir-9-2}), @emph{not} as @code{JIS_C6229-1984-b} (alias
@code{iso-ir-92}).  So better avoid using these two alias names.

@item
It ignores all about code overloading, but still processes correctly the
remainder of @code{dk-us} and @code{us-dk}.

@end enumerate

Keld Simonsen @file{keld@@dkuug.dk} did most of RFC 1345 himself, with
some funding from Danish Standards and Nordic standards (INSTA) project.
He also did the character set design work, with substantial input from
Olle Jaernefors.  Keld typed in almost all of the tables, some have been
contributed.  A number of people have checked the tables in various
ways.  The RFC lists a number of people who helped.

Internally, RFC 1345 associates which each character an unambiguous
mnemonic of (usually) one or two characters, taken from ISO 646, a
minimal set of 83 characters.  The charset made up by these mnemonics is
available in @code{recode} under the name @code{RFC 1345}, with @code{.}
being accepted as a short alias.

Even if the mnemonics are unambiguous taken separately, strings made up
by concatenating these mnemonics are ambiguous and cannot be safely
interpreted.  So @code{recode} only allows converting @emph{to} RFC
1345, never from it.  However, special machinery in the program allows
for converting @emph{through} RFC 1345, when RFC 1345 is neither the
initial nor the final charset of the conversion sequence.

Recoding directly to @code{.} has the main goal of letting the user
examine foreign charsets.  We cannot do much, mechanically, with the
result.  For increased readability, as a matter of convenience,
@code{SP} is left as a single space and @code{LF} becomes a newline.

@table @code
@include charset.texi

@end table

@node ISO charsets, IBM charsets, RFC 1345 charsets, Top
@chapter Charsets based on ASCII

@menu
* ASCII::               Usual ASCII
* ISO 8859-1 charset::  ASCII extended by Latin Alphabets
* ASCII-BS::            ASCII 7-bits, @key{BS} to overstrike
* flat::                ASCII without diacritics nor underline
@end menu

@node ASCII, ISO 8859-1 charset, ISO charsets, ISO charsets
@section Usual ASCII

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{ASCII}.
In fact, it's true name is @code{ANSI_X3.4-1968} as per RFC 1345,
accepted aliases being @code{ANSI_X3.4-1986}, @code{ASCII},
@code{IBM367}, @code{ISO646-US}, @code{ISO_646.irv:1991},
@code{US-ASCII}, @code{cp367}, @code{iso-ir-6} and @code{us}.  The
shortest way of specifying it in @code{recode} is @code{us}.

This documentation used to include ASCII tables.  They have been removed
since @code{recode} can now recreate these (and a lot of others) easily:

@example
recode -lf us                   for commented ASCII
recode -ld us                   for concise decimal table
recode -lo us                   for concise octal table
recode -lh us                   for concise hexadecimal table
@end example

@node ISO 8859-1 charset, ASCII-BS, ASCII, ISO charsets
@section ASCII extended by Latin Alphabets

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{Latin-1}.
In fact, it's true name is @code{ISO_8859-1:1987} as per RFC 1345,
accepted aliases being @code{CP819}, @code{IBM819}, @code{ISO-8859-1},
@code{ISO_8859-1}, @code{iso-ir-100}, @code{l1} and @code{Latin-1}.  The
shortest way of specifying it in @code{recode} is @code{l1}.

This charset corresponds to the ISO Latin Alphabet 1.  It is an eight-bit
code which coincides with ASCII for the lower half.

This documentation used to include Latin-1 tables.  They have been
removed since @code{recode} can now recreate these (and a lot of others)
easily:

@example
recode -lf l1                   for commented ISO Latin-1
recode -ld l1                   for concise decimal table
recode -lo l1                   for concise octal table
recode -lh l1                   for concise hexadecimal table
@end example

The following from @file{lasko@@video.dec.com} (Tim Lasko), with no
date.

@quotation
ISO Latin-1, or more completely ISO Latin Alphabet No 1, is now an
international standard as of February 1987 (IS 8859, Part 1).  For
those American USEnet'rs that care, the 8-bit ASCII standard, which is
essentially the same code, is going through the final administrative
processes prior to publication.

ISO Latin-1 (IS 8859/1) is actually one of an entire family of
eight-bit one-byte character sets, all having ASCII on the left hand
side, and with varying repertoires on the right hand side:
@end quotation

@enumerate
@item
Latin Alphabet No 1 (caters to Western Europe - now approved).
@item
Latin Alphabet No 2 (caters to Eastern Europe - now approved).
@item
Latin Alphabet No 3 (caters to SE Europe + others - in draft ballot).
@item
Latin Alphabet No 4 (caters to Northern Europe - in draft ballot).
@item
Latin-Cyrillic alphabet (right half all Cyrillic - processing currently
suspended pending USSR input).
@item
Latin-Arabic alphabet (right half all Arabic - now approved).
@item
Latin-Greek alphabet (right half Greek + symbols - in draft ballot).
@item
Latin-Hebrew alphabet (right half Hebrew + symbols - proposed).
@end enumerate

@node ASCII-BS, flat, ISO 8859-1 charset, ISO charsets
@section ASCII 7-bits, @key{BS} to overstrike

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name
@code{ASCII-BS}, with @code{BS} as an acceptable alias.

The file is straight ASCII, seven bits only.  According to the definition
of ASCII: diacritics are applied by a sequence of three characters: the
letter, one @key{BS}, the diacritic mark.  We deviate slightly from this
by exchanging the diacritic mark and the letter so, on a screen device, the
diacritic will disappear and let the letter alone.  At recognition time,
both methods are acceptable.

The French quotes are coded by the sequences: @kbd{< @key{BS} "} or @kbd{"
@key{BS} <} for the opening quote and @kbd{> @key{BS} "} or @kbd{"
@key{BS} >} for the closing quote.  This artificial convention was
inherited in straight @code{ASCII-BS} from habits around @code{Bang-Bang}
entry, and is not well known.  But we decided to stick to it so that
@code{ASCII-BS} charset will not loose French quotes.

The @code{ASCII-BS} charset is independent of @code{ASCII}, and
different.  The following examples demonstrate this, knowing at advance
that @samp{!2} is the @code{Bang-Bang} way of representing an @kbd{e}
with an acute accent.  Compare:

@example
% echo \!2 | recode -v bang:us | od -bc
Bang-Bang -> ISO_8859-1:1987 -> RFC 1345 -> ANSI_X3.4-1968 (many to one)
Simplified to: Bang-Bang -> ISO_8859-1:1987 -> ANSI_X3.4-1968 (many to one)
0000000 351 012
        351  \n
0000002
@end example

@noindent
with:

@example
% echo \!2 | recode -v bang:bs | od -bc
Bang-Bang -> ISO_8859-1:1987 -> ASCII-BS (many to many)
0000000 047 010 145 012
          '  \b   e  \n
0000004
@end example

In the first case, the @kbd{e} with an acute accent is merely
transmitted by the @code{Latin-1:ASCII} mapping, not having a special
recoding rule for it.  In the @code{Latin-1:ASCII-BS} case, the acute
accent is applied over the @kbd{e} with a backspace: diacriticized
characters have special rules.  For the @code{ASCII-BS} charset,
reversibility is still possible, but there might be difficult cases.

@node flat,  , ASCII-BS, ISO charsets
@section ASCII without diacritics nor underline

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{flat}.

This code is ASCII expunged of all diacritics and underlines, as long as
they are applied using three character sequences, with @key{BS} in the
middle.  Also, despite slightly unrelated, each control character is
represented by a sequence of two or three graphic characters.  The newline
character, however, keeps its functionality and is not represented.

Note that charset @code{flat} is a terminal charset.  We can convert
@emph{to} @code{flat}, but not @emph{from} it.

@node IBM charsets, CDC charsets, ISO charsets, Top
@chapter Charsets based on IBM

@menu
* EBCDIC::              EBCDIC codes
* IBM-PC::              IBM's PC code
* Icon-QNX::            Unisys' ICON code
@end menu

@node EBCDIC, IBM-PC, IBM charsets, IBM charsets
@section EBCDIC code

This charset is the IBM's external binary coded decimal for interchange
coding.  This is an eight bits code.  The following three variants were
implemented in GNU @code{recode} independently of RFC 1345:

@table @code

@item EBCDIC
GNU @code{recode} @code{us:ebcdic} conversion is identical to GNU
@code{dd} @code{ebcdic} conversion, and @code{recode} @code{ebcdic:us}
conversion is identical to GNU @code{dd} @code{ascii} conversion.  This
charset also represents the way Control Data Corporation relates EBCDIC
to 8-bits ASCII.

@item EBCDIC-CCC
GNU @code{recode} @code{us:ebcdic-ccc} or @code{ebcdic-ccc:us}
conversions represent the way Concurrent Computer Corporation (formerly
Perkin Elmer) relates EBCDIC to 8-bits ASCII.

@item EBCDIC-IBM
GNU @code{recode} @code{us:ebcdic-ibm} conversion is @emph{almost}
identical to GNU @code{dd} @code{ibm} conversion.  Given the exact
@code{dd} @code{ibm} conversion table, @code{recode} once said:

@example
Codes  91 and 213 both recode to 173
Codes  93 and 229 both recode to 189
No character recodes to  74
No character recodes to 106
@end example

So I arbitrarily chose to recode 213 by 74 and 229 by 106.  This makes
the @code{EBCDIC-IBM} recoding reversible, but this is not necessarily
the best correction.  In any case, I believe GNU @code{dd} should be
corrected, and preferably, GNU @code{dd} and GNU @code{recode} should
agree on the same correction.  So, this table may change once again.

@end table

RFC 1345 brings in @code{recode} 15 other EBCDIC charsets, and 21 other
charsets having EBCDIC in at least one of their alias names.  You can
get a list of all these by executing:

@example
recode -l | grep ebcdic
@end example

@node IBM-PC, Icon-QNX, EBCDIC, IBM charsets
@section IBM's PC code

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{IBM-PC}.
There are a few discrepancies between this charset and the very similar
RFC 1345 charset @code{ibm437}, which have not been analyzed yet, so the
charsets are being kept separate for now.  This might change in the
future.

The file was obtained or is aimed towards a PC microcomputer from IBM or
any compatible.  This is an eight-bit code.

@node Icon-QNX,  , IBM-PC, IBM charsets
@section Unisys' ICON code

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name
@code{Icon-QNX}, with @code{QNX} as an acceptable alias.

The file is using Unisys' Icon way to represent diacritics with code 25
escape sequences, under the system QNX.  This is a seven-bit code, even
if eight-bit codes can flow through as part of IBM-PC charset.

@node CDC charsets, Micro charsets, IBM charsets, Top
@chapter Charsets based on CDC

@menu
* Display Code::        Control Data's Display Code
* CDC-NOS::             ASCII 6/12 from NOS
* Bang-Bang::           ASCII ``bang bang''
@end menu

@node Display Code, CDC-NOS, CDC charsets, CDC charsets
@section Control Data's Display Code

This code is not available in @code{recode}, but repeated here for
reference.  This is a 6-bit code used on CDC mainframes.

@example
Octal display code to graphic       Octal display code to octal ASCII

00  :    20  P    40  5   60  #     00 072  20 120  40 065  60 043
01  A    21  Q    41  6   61  [     01 101  21 121  41 066  61 133
02  B    22  R    42  7   62  ]     02 102  22 122  42 067  62 135
03  C    23  S    43  8   63  %     03 103  23 123  43 070  63 045
04  D    24  T    44  9   64  "     04 104  24 124  44 071  64 042
05  E    25  U    45  +   65  _     05 105  25 125  45 053  65 137
06  F    26  V    46  -   66  !     06 106  26 126  46 055  66 041
07  G    27  W    47  *   67  &     07 107  27 127  47 052  67 046
10  H    30  X    50  /   70  '     10 110  30 130  50 057  70 047
11  I    31  Y    51  (   71  ?     11 111  31 131  51 050  71 077
12  J    32  Z    52  )   72  <     12 112  32 132  52 051  72 074
13  K    33  0    53  $   73  >     13 113  33 060  53 044  73 076
14  L    34  1    54  =   74  @@     14 114  34 061  54 075  74 100
15  M    35  2    55      75  \     15 115  35 062  55 040  75 134
16  N    36  3    56  ,   76  ^     16 116  36 063  56 054  76 136
17  O    37  4    57  .   77  ;     17 117  37 064  57 056  77 073
@end example

@node CDC-NOS, Bang-Bang, Display Code, CDC charsets
@section ASCII 6/12 from NOS

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name
@code{CDC-NOS}, with @code{NOS} as an acceptable alias.

This is one of the charset in use on CDC Cyber NOS systems to represent
ASCII, sometimes named @dfn{NOS 6/12} code for coding ASCII.  This code is
also known as @dfn{caret ASCII}.  It is based on a six bits character set
in which small letters and control characters are coded using a @kbd{^}
escape and, sometimes, a @kbd{@@} escape.

The routines given here presume that the six bits code is already expressed
in ASCII by the communication channel, with embedded ASCII @kbd{^} and
@kbd{@@} escapes.

Here is a table showing which characters are being used to encode each
ASCII character.

@example
000  ^5  020  ^#  040     060  0  100 @@A  120  P  140  @@G  160  ^P
001  ^6  021  ^[  041  !  061  1  101  A  121  Q  141  ^A  161  ^Q
002  ^7  022  ^]  042  "  062  2  102  B  122  R  142  ^B  162  ^R
003  ^8  023  ^%  043  #  063  3  103  C  123  S  143  ^C  163  ^S
004  ^9  024  ^"  044  $  064  4  104  D  124  T  144  ^D  164  ^T
005  ^+  025  ^_  045  %  065  5  105  E  125  U  145  ^E  165  ^U
006  ^-  026  ^!  046  &  066  6  106  F  126  V  146  ^F  166  ^V
007  ^*  027  ^&  047  '  067  7  107  G  127  W  147  ^G  167  ^W
010  ^/  030  ^'  050  (  070  8  110  H  130  X  150  ^H  170  ^X
011  ^(  031  ^?  051  )  071  9  111  I  131  Y  151  ^I  171  ^Y
012  ^)  032  ^<  052  *  072 @@D  112  J  132  Z  152  ^J  172  ^Z
013  ^$  033  ^>  053  +  073  ;  113  K  133  [  153  ^K  173  ^0
014  ^=  034  ^@@  054  ,  074  <  114  L  134  \  154  ^L  174  ^1
015  ^   035  ^\  055  -  075  =  115  M  135  ]  155  ^M  175  ^2
016  ^,  036  ^^  056  .  076  >  116  N  136 @@B  156  ^N  176  ^3
017  ^.  037  ^;  057  /  077  ?  117  O  137  _  157  ^O  177  ^4
@end example

@node Bang-Bang,  , CDC-NOS, CDC charsets
@section ASCII ``bang bang''

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{Bang-Bang}.

This is the local code in use on Cybers at Universite de Montreal, which
grave and serious people there prefer to name @dfn{ASCII code display}.
This code is also known as @dfn{Bang-bang}.  It is based on a six bits
character set in which capitals, French diacritics and a few others are
coded using an @kbd{!} escape followed by a single character, and
control characters using a double @kbd{!} escape followed by a single
character.

The routines given here presume that the six bits code is already expressed
in ASCII by the communication channel, with embedded ASCII @kbd{!}
escapes.

Here is a table showing which characters are being used to encode each
ASCII character.

@example
000 !!@@  020 !!P  040    060 0  100 @@   120 !P  140 !@@ 160 P
001 !!A  021 !!Q  041 !" 061 1  101 !A  121 !Q  141 A  161 Q
002 !!B  022 !!R  042 "  062 2  102 !B  122 !R  142 B  162 R
003 !!C  023 !!S  043 #  063 3  103 !C  123 !S  143 C  163 S
004 !!D  024 !!T  044 $  064 4  104 !D  124 !T  144 D  164 T
005 !!E  025 !!U  045 %  065 5  105 !E  125 !U  145 E  165 U
006 !!F  026 !!V  046 &  066 6  106 !F  126 !V  146 F  166 V
007 !!G  027 !!W  047 '  067 7  107 !G  127 !W  147 G  167 W
010 !!H  030 !!X  050 (  070 8  110 !H  130 !X  150 H  170 X
011 !!I  031 !!Y  051 )  071 9  111 !I  131 !Y  151 I  171 Y
012 !!J  032 !!Z  052 *  072 :  112 !J  132 !Z  152 J  172 Z
013 !!K  033 !![  053 +  073 ;  113 !K  133 [   153 K  173 ![
014 !!L  034 !!\  054 ,  074 <  114 !L  134 \   154 L  174 !\
015 !!M  035 !!]  055 -  075 =  115 !M  135 ]   155 M  175 !]
016 !!N  036 !!^  056 .  076 >  116 !N  136 ^   156 N  176 !^
017 !!O  037 !!_  057 /  077 ?  117 !O  137 _   157 O  177 !_
@end example

@node Micro charsets, Other charsets, CDC charsets, Top
@chapter Non-IBM micro-computer charsets

@menu
* Apple-Mac::           Apple's Macintosh code
* AtariST::             Atari ST code
* NeXT::                NeXT international code
@end menu

@node Apple-Mac, AtariST, Micro charsets, Micro charsets
@section Apple's Macintosh code

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name
@code{Apple-Mac}.  There are a few discrepancies between this charset and
the very similar RFC 1345 charset @code{macintosh}, which have not been
analyzed yet, so the charsets are being kept separate for now.  This
might change in the future.

The file has been obtained or is aimed to a Macintosh micro-computer from
Apple.  This is an eight bit code.  The file is the data fork only.

@node AtariST, NeXT, Apple-Mac, Micro charsets
@section Atari ST code

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{AtariST}.

This is the character set used on the Atari ST/TT/Falcon.  This is
similar to @code{IBM-PC}, but differs in some details (includes some more
accented characters, the graphic characters are mostly replaced by
hebrew characters, and there is a true German @key{sharp s} different
from Greek @key{beta}).

About the end-of-line conversions: the canonical end-of-line on the
Atari is @samp{\r\n}, but unlike @code{IBM-PC}, the OS makes no
difference between text and binary input/output; it is up to the
application how to interpret the data.  In fact, most of the libraries
that come with compilers can grok both @samp{\r\n} and @samp{\n} as end
of lines.  Many of the users who also have access to Unix systems prefer
@samp{\n} to ease porting Unix utilities.  So, for easing reversibility,
@code{recode} tries to let @samp{\r} undisturbed through recodings.

@node NeXT,  , AtariST, Micro charsets
@section NeXT international code

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{NeXT}.

The NeXT encoding is an extension to the ISO Latin-1 ASCII encoding used
by NeXT under the system NeXTSTEP.  It is identical to Latin-1 for the
positions 0-127.  In the position 128-255, NeXT added some chars and
shuffled them around a little bit (for some unknown reason).

@node Other charsets, Internals, Micro charsets, Top
@chapter Some other charsets

Even if these charsets were originally added to @code{recode} for
handling texts written in French, they find other uses.  We did use them
lot for writing French diacriticized texts in the past, so @code{recode}
knows how to handle these particularly well for French texts.

@menu
* LaTeX::               ASCII with LaTeX codes
* Texte::               ASCII with easy French conventions
* HTML::                World Wide Web representations
@end menu

@node LaTeX, Texte, Other charsets, Other charsets
@section ASCII with LaTeX codes

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{LaTeX}
and has @code{ltex} as an alias.  It is used for ASCII files coded to be
read by La@TeX{} or, in certain cases, by @TeX{}.

Whenever you recode from another charset to @code{LaTeX}, beware that
all occurrences of backslashes @kbd{\} are usually translated into
the string @samp{\backslash@{@}}.  However, in practice, people often
use backslashes in the other charset for introducing @TeX{} commands,
compromising it: it is not pure @TeX{}, nor it is pure other charset.
This translation of backslashes into @samp{\backslash@{@}} can be rather
inconvenient, it may be inhibited through the command option @code{-d}.

@node Texte, HTML, LaTeX, Other charsets
@section ASCII with easy French conventions

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{Texte}
and has @code{txte} for an alias.

This charset is a seven bits code, identical to @code{ASCII-BS}, save
for French diacritics which are noted using a slightly different
convention.

At text entry time, these conventions provide a little speed up.  At
read time, they slightly improve the readability over a few alternate
ways of coding diacritics.  Of course, it would better to have a
specialized keyboard to make direct eight bits entries and fonts for
immediately displaying eight bit ISO Latin-1 characters.  But not
everybody is so fortunate.  In several mailing environments, the eight
bit is often willingfully destroyed.

Easy French has been in use in France for a while.  I only slightly
adapted it (the diaeresis option) to make it more comfortable to several
usages in Qu@'ebec originating from Universit@'e de Montr@'eal.  In
fact, the main problem for me was not to necessarily to invent Easy
French, but to recognize the ``best'' convention to use, (best is not
being defined, here) and to try to solve the main pitfalls associated
with the selected convention.

@menu
* Diacritics::          Diacritics
* Ending diaeresis::    List of words ending with diaeresis
@end menu

@node Diacritics, Ending diaeresis, Texte, Texte
@subsection Diacritics

French quotes (sometimes called ``angle quotes'') are noted the same way
English quotes are noted in @TeX{}, @emph{id est} by @kbd{``} and
@kbd{''}.

No effort has been put to preserve Latin ligatures (@kbd{ae}, @kbd{oe})
which are representable in several other charsets.  So, these ligatures
may be lost through Easy French conventions.

This is almost the French convention for simplified diacritics entry:

@table @kbd
@item e'
Acute accent
@item e`
Grave accent
@item e^
Circumflex accent
@item e"
Diaeresis
@item c,
Cedilla
@end table

In some countries, @kbd{:} is used instead of @kbd{"} to mark diaeresis.
@code{recode} support one convention on a single call, depending on the
@code{-c} option of the @code{recode} command.

The convention is prone to loosing information, because the diacritic
meaning overloads some characters that already have other uses.  To
alleviate this, some knowledge of the French language is boosted into
the recognition routines.  So, the following subtleties are systematically
obeyed by the various recognizers.

@itemize @bullet
@item
A single quote which follows a @kbd{e} does not necessarily means an acute
accent if it is followed by a single other one.  For example:

@table @kbd
@item e'
will give an @kbd{e} with an acute accent.
@item e''
will give a simple @kbd{e}, with a closing quotation mark.
@item e'''
will give an @kbd{e} with an acute accent, followed by a closing quotation
mark.
@end table

There is a problem induced by this convention if there are English
quotations with a French text.  In sentences like:

@example
There's a meeting at Archie's restaurant.
@end example

the single quotes will be mistaken twice for acute accents.  So English
contractions and suffix possessives could be mangled.

@item
A double quote or colon, depending on @code{-c} option, which follows a
vowel is interpreted as diaeresis only if it is followed by another
letter.  But there are in French several words that @emph{end} with a
diaeresis, the program also recognizes them.  @xref{Ending diaeresis},
for a study of all the problematic cases.

@item
A comma which follows a @kbd{c} is interpreted as a cedilla only if it is
followed by one of the vowels @kbd{a}, @kbd{o} and @kbd{u}.

@end itemize

@node Ending diaeresis,  , Diacritics, Texte
@subsection List of words ending with diaeresis

Here is a classification of all cases of a diaeresis at the end of a French
word:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Words ending in ``igue''

@itemize -
@item
Feminine words without a relative masculine: @samp{besaigue"} and
@samp{cigue"}.

@item
Feminine words with a relative masculine (1): @samp{aigue"},
@samp{ambigue"}, @samp{contigue"}, @samp{exigue"}, @samp{subaigue"} and
@samp{suraigue"}.

@end itemize

@item
Words not ending in ``igue''

@itemize -
@item
Ended by ``i'' (2): @samp{ai"}, @samp{congai"}, @samp{goi"},
@samp{hai"kai"}, @samp{inoui"}, @samp{sai"}, @samp{samurai"},
@samp{thai"} and @samp{tokai"}.

@item
Ended by ``e'': @samp{canoe"}.

@item
Ended by ``u'' (3): @samp{Esau"}.

@end itemize
@end itemize

Notes:

@enumerate
@item
There are supposed to be seven words in this case.  So, one is missing.

@item
Look at one of the following sentences (the second has to be interpreted
with the @code{-c} option):

@example
"Ai"e!  Voici le proble`me que j'ai"
Ai:e!  Voici le proble`me que j'ai:
@end example

There is an ambiguity between an @samp{ai"}, the small animal, and the
indicative future of @emph{avoir} (first person singular), when followed
by what could be a diaeresis mark.  Hopefully, the case is solved by the
fact that an apostrophe always precedes the verb and almost never the
animal.

@item
I did not pay attention to proper nouns, but this one showed up as being
fairly evident.

@end enumerate

Just to complete this topic, note that it would be wrong to make a rule
for all words ending in ``igue'' as needing a diaerisis.  Here are
counter-examples: @samp{becfigue}, @samp{be`sigue}, @samp{bigue},
@samp{bordigue}, @samp{bourdigue}, @samp{brigue}, @samp{contre-digue},
@samp{digue}, @samp{d'intrigue}, @samp{fatigue}, @samp{figue},
@samp{garrigue}, @samp{gigue}, @samp{igue}, @samp{intrigue},
@samp{ligue}, @samp{prodigue}, @samp{sarigue} and @samp{zigue}.

@node HTML,  , Texte, Other charsets
@section World Wide Web representations

This charset is available in @code{recode} under the name @code{HTML}
and has @code{w3} and @code{WWW} for aliases.

HTML texts used by World Wide Web limit themselves to 7-bit characters
internally, special sequences beginning with an ampersand @kbd{&} and
ending with a semicolon @kbd{;} are used for representing characters
from Latin-1 having the 8th bit set.

When you recode from another charset to @code{HTML}, beware that all
occurrences of ampersands are usually translated into the string
@samp{&amp;}, similarly, left angle brackets @kbd{<} are translated
into @samp{&lt;} and right angle brackets @kbd{>} are translated into
@samp{&gt;}.  However, in practice, people often use ampersands and
angle brackets in the other charset for introducing HTML commands,
compromising it: it is not pure HTML, not it is pure other charset.
These three translations can be rather inconvenient, they may be
specifically inhibited through the command option @code{-d}.

@node Internals,  , Other charsets, Top
@chapter Internal aspects

Suppose that four elementary steps are selected at path optimization
time.  Then @code{recode} will split itself into four different tasks
interconnected with pipes, logically equivalent to:

@example
@var{step1} <@var{input} | @var{step2} | @var{step3} | @var{step4} >@var{output}
@end example

@menu
* Main flow::           Overall organization
* New charsets::        Adding new charsets
@end menu

@node Main flow, New charsets, Internals, Internals
@section Overall organization

The main driver constructs, while initializing all conversion modules, a
table giving all the conversion routines available (@dfn{single step}s)
and for each, the starting charset and the ending charset.  If we
consider these charsets as being the nodes of a directed graph, each
single step may be considered as oriented arc from one node to the
other.  A cost is attributed to each arc: for example, a high penalty
is given to single steps which are prone to loosing characters, a low
penalty is given to those which need studying more than one input
character for producing an output character, etc.

Given a starting code and a goal code, @code{recode} computes the most
economical route through the elementary recodings, that is, the best
sequence of conversions that will transform the input charset into the
final charset.  To speed up execution, @code{recode} looks for
subsequences of conversions which are simple enough to be merged, it
then dynamically creates new single steps for these mergings.

A @dfn{double step} is a sequence of two single steps, the output of the
first being the special charset @code{rfc1345}, the input of the second
single step being also @code{rfc1345}.  A special machinery dynamically
produces efficient, reversible, merge-able single steps out of these
double steps.

The main part of @code{recode} is written in C, as are most single
steps.  A few single steps need to recognize sequences of multiple
characters, they are often better written in @code{flex}.

@node New charsets,  , Main flow, Internals
@section Adding new charsets

It is easy for a programmer to add a new charset to @code{recode}.  All
it requires is making a few functions kept in a single @file{.c} file,
adjusting @file{Makefile.in}, and remaking @code{recode}.

One of the function should convert from any previous charset to the new
one.  Any previous charset will do, but try to select it so you will not
loose too much information while converting.  The other function should
convert from the new charset to any older one.  You do not have to
select the same old charset than what you selected for the previous
routine.  Once again, select any charset for which you will not loose
too much information while converting.

If, for any of these two functions, you have to read multiple bytes of
the old charset before recognizing the character to produce, you might
prefer programming it in @code{flex} in a separate @file{.l} file.
Prototype your C or @code{flex} files after one of those which exist
already, so to keep the sources uniform.  Besides, at @code{make} time,
all @file{.l} files are automatically merged into a single big one by
the script @file{mergelex.awk}, which requires sources to follow some
rules.  Mimetism is a simple approach which relieves me of explaining
all these rules!

Each of your source files should have its own initialization function,
named @code{module_@var{charset}}, which is meant to be executed
quickly, once, prior to any recoding.  It should declare the name of
your charsets and the single steps (or elementary recodings) you
provide, by calling @code{declare_step} one or more times.  Besides the
charset names, @code{declare_step} expects a description of the recoding
quality (see @file{recode.h}) and two functions you also provide.

The first such function has the purpose of allocating structures,
preconditioning conversion tables, etc.  It is also the usual way of
further modifying the @code{STEP} structure.  This function is executed
only if and when the single step is retained in an actual recoding
sequence.  If you do not need such delayed initialization, merely use
@code{NULL} for the function argument.

The second function executes the elementary recoding on a whole file.
There are a few cases when you can spare writing this function:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Some single steps do nothing else than a pure copy of the input onto the
output, in this case, you can use the predefined function
@code{file_one_to_one}, while having a delayed initialization for
presetting the @code{STEP} field @code{one_to_one} to the predefined
value @code{one_to_same}.

@item
Some single steps are driven by a table which recodes one character into
another; if the recoding does nothing else, you can use the predefined
function @code{file_one_to_one}, while having a delayed initialization
for presetting the @code{STEP} field @code{one_to_one} with your table.

@item
Some single steps are driven by a table which recodes one character into
a string; if the recoding does nothing else, you can use the predefined
function @code{file_one_to_many}, while having a delayed initialization
for presetting the @code{STEP} field @code{one_to_many} with your table.

@end itemize

If you have a recoding table handy in a suitable format but do not use
one of the predefined recoding functions, it is still a good idea to use
a delayed initialization to save it anyway, because @code{recode} option
@code{-h} will take advantage of this information when available.

Finally, edit @file{Makefile.in} to add the source file name of your
routines to the @code{C_STEPS} or @code{L_STEPS} macro definition,
depending on the fact your routines is written in C or in @code{flex}.
For C files only, also modify the @code{STEPOBJS} macro definition.

@contents
@bye

@c Local Variables:
@c texinfo-column-for-description: 24
@c End:
